PEP 758 External Wheel Hosting (#1)
wheelnext/peps: peps/pep-0758.rst

specifications.

This PEP also preserves the core purpose of PyPI, and allows it to
remain the traditional, canonical, centralized index of all Python
packages.

It's not just about indexes
===========================

The problem *this* PEP solves is not just reduction or elimination of
dependency confusion attacks. There is another class of problem that a safe
external wheel hosting solution can mitigate: artifact size limits.

PyPI imposes a `default artifact size limit
<https://pypi.org/help/#file-size-limit>`__ of 100MiB and a default overall
`project size limit <https://pypi.org/help/#project-size-limit>`__ of
10GiB. Most packages and artifacts can easily fit in these limits, even for
packages containing binary extension modules for a variety of platforms. A
small, but important class of packages routinely exceed these limits,
requiring them to submit PyPI support tickets `requesting higher limits
<https://github.com/pypi/support/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aclosed+file+limit+request>`__.
It's not necessarily difficult to get resolution on such exceptions, but it is
a special process that can take some time to resolve, and the criteria for

> granting such exceptions isn't well documented.

Reviewer: May be good to point out that this process makes more work for the already busy PyPi admins, ideally, they wouldn't have to interact with things like this!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
granting such exceptions isn't well documented. Furthermore, this process creates more work for the PyPi admins who are already overtaxed with other PyPi-related requests.
```

Maybe something like this?

Reviewer 2: Possibly, although I'm still technically proposing some admin interaction, i.e. to approve org account external hosting.  So it reduces but doesn't fully eliminate admin load.  OTOH, we could auto-approve orgs once they add a support URI.

Reviewer: Ah I think I meant to express that we're reducing the admin load, which I think you actually cover below. I'll resolve this :)

below. The file name format exactly matches the `wheel file naming format
<https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/binary-distribution-format/#file-format>`__
specification, except that RIM files use the suffix ``.rim``. This means that
all the tags used to discriminate ``.whl`` files also distinguish between
different ``.rim`` files, and thus can be used during dependency resolution
steps, exactly as ``.whl`` files are today. In this respect, ``.whl`` and
``.rim`` files are interchangeable.

The content of a ``.rim`` file is *nearly* identical to ``.whl`` files,
however ``.rim`` files MUST contain only the ``.dist-info`` directory from a
wheel. No other top-level file or directory is allowed in the ``.rim`` zip
file. The ``.dist-info`` directory MUST contain a single additional file in
addition to those `allowed
<https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/binary-distribution-format/#the-dist-info-directory>`__
in a ``.whl`` file's ``.dist-info`` directory: a file called
``EXTERNAL-HOSTING``.

The format of this file contains lines of key-value pairs separated by a
colon, in what :pep:`1` calls in its "PEP Header Preamble" section,

> :rfc:`2822` style headers. The following header keys are mandatory and
> exclusive (all headers are case-insensitive):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:rfc:`2822` style headers. The following header keys are mandatory, 
should only appear once per file, and are case-insensitive:
```
I think this is clearer that they should only appear once (the original text makes it sounds like the headers are mutually exclusive).

Reviewer 2: See my comment below, re: the suggestion that this file be JSON.

is not necessary. Since ``.rim`` files are essentially changes only to the
upload API, package resolvers and package installers can continue to function
with the APIs they've always supported.

External hosting resiliency
===========================

One of the key concerns leading to PEP 438's revocation in PEP 470 was
potential user confusion when an external index disappeared. From PEP 470:

   This confusion comes down to end users of projects not realizing if a
   project is hosted on PyPI or if it relies on an external service. This
   often manifests itself when the external service is down but PyPI is
   not. People will see that PyPI works, and other projects works, but this
   one specific one does not. They oftentimes do not realize who they need to
   contact in order to get this fixed or what their remediation steps are.

While the problem of external wheel hosting service going down is not directly
solved by this PEP, several safeguards are in place to greatly reduce the
potential burden on PyPI administrators.

This PEP thus proposes that:

- External wheel hosting is only allowed for packages which are owned by

>   `organization accounts <https://docs.pypi.org/organization-accounts/>`__.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `organization accounts <https://docs.pypi.org/organization-accounts/>`__.
  External hosting is an organization-wide setting.
```

I think it would be good to be clear up front that this setting is org-wide, not per-file.

Reviewer 2: Good point!

- Organization accounts do not automatically gain the ability to externally

>   host wheels; this feature MUST be explicitly enabled by PyPI admins. Since

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  host wheels; this feature MUST be explicitly enabled by PyPI admins at their discretion. Since
```

  handled in the same manner as those requests, i.e. via the `PyPI GitHub
  support tracker <https://github.com/pypi/support>`__.
- Organization accounts requesting external wheel hosting MUST register their
  own support contact URI, be it a ``mailto`` URI for a contact email address,
  or the URL to the organization's support tracker. Such a contact URI is
  optional for organizations which do not avail themselves of external wheel
  file hosting.

Combined with the ``EXTERNAL-HOSTING`` file's ``Owner`` key, this allows for
installer tools to unambiguously redirect any download errors away from the
PyPI support admins and squarely to the organization's support admins.

While the exact mechanics of storing and retrieving this organization support
URL will be defined separately, for the sake of example, let's say a package
``foo`` externally hosts wheel files on ```https://foo.example.com``
<https://foo.example.com>`__ and that host becomes unreachable. When an
installer tool tries to download and install the package ``foo`` wheel, the
download step will fail. The installer would then be able to query PyPI to
provide a useful error message to the end user:

> - The installer reads the ``Owner`` field from the ``EXTERNAL-HOSTING`` file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The installer downloads the `.rim` file and reads the ``Owner`` field from the ``EXTERNAL-HOSTING`` file
```

I think we should specifically call out that pypi.org should serve the RIM files.

- Unzip the ``.whl`` and create the ``.rim`` zip archive.
- Omit from the ``.rim`` file any path in the ``.whl`` that **isn't** rooted
  at the ``.dist-info`` directory.
- Calculate the hash of the source ``.whl`` file.
- Add to the ``.rim`` archive the ``EXTERNAL-HOSTING`` file containing
  the headers and their values as described above.

Changes to tools
================

Theoretically, installer tools shouldn't need any changes, since when they
have identified the wheel to download and install, they simply consult the
download URLs returned by PyPI's Simple API. In practice though, tools such as
``pip`` and ``uv`` may have constrained lists of hosts they will allow
downloads from, such as PyPI's own ``pythonhosted.org`` domain.

In this case, such tools will need to relax those constraints, but the exact
policy for this is left to the installer tools themselves. Any number of
approaches could be implemented, such as downloading the ``.rim`` file and
verifying the ``EXTERNAL-HOSTING`` metadata, or simply trusting the external
downloads for any wheel with a matching checksum.  They could also query PyPI
for the project's organization owner, then verify that it has a support URI

> before trusting the download. They could warn the user when externally hosted

Reviewer: Isn't this extant by construction? IOW I don't think this is a check that needs to be made?

Reviewer 2: If I understand the question correctly, I think in general an installer wouldn't need to download the `.rim` file since all the information it needs is in the package metadata and download urls.  The only other thing that `E-H` file contains is the owner information, which AFAICT is not available in the [PEP 691 project detail JSON](https://peps.python.org/pep-0691/#project-detail).  Maybe it should be, but that's a different question.

Reviewer: Sorry, I realize this may have been a bit opaque. I was responding to the installer verifying the project's organization has a support URI. Specifically:
> They could also query PyPI for the project's organization owner, then verify that it has a support URI
> before trusting the download.

We're already specifying that all organizations with projects using external hosting must have a contact URI, so I don't understand why pip would verify that if it is part of the contract pypi.org would provide.

FWIW I think it would be good to serve the EH file from PyPi. Since external hosting is a PyPi-centric design, I don't think we need to touch the simple API. Installers can just query for the EH file if they see that the file location is outside of `pythonhosted.org` when doing their normal simple API search.

Reviewer 2: > We're already specifying that all organizations with projects using external hosting must have a contact URI, so I don't understand why pip would verify that if it is part of the contract pypi.org would provide.

Ah, makes sense.

> FWIW I think it would be good to serve the EH file from PyPi. Since external hosting is a PyPi-centric design, I don't think we need to touch the simple API. Installers can just query for the EH file if they see that the file location is outside of pythonhosted.org when doing their normal simple API search.

The EH file itself or the whole `.rim` file.  The latter will already be accessible, so I don't think PyPI needs to unpack the `.rim` and serve the EH file independently.

  cannot be changed. Since the checksum stored on PyPI is immutable and
  required, it is not possible to spoof an external wheel file, even if the
  owning organization lost control of their hosting domain.
- Externally hosted wheels MUST be served over HTTPS.
- In order to serve externally hosted wheels, organizations MUST be approved
  by the PyPI admins.

When users identify malware or vulnerabilities in PyPI-hosted projects, they
can now report this using the `malware reporting facilities
<https://pypi.org/security/>`__ on PyPI, as also described in this
`blog post
<https://blog.pypi.org/posts/2024-03-06-malware-reporting-evolved/>`__.  The
same process can be used to report security issues in externally hosted
wheels, and the same remediation process should be used.  In addition, since
organizations with external hosting enabled MUST provide a support contact
URI, that URI can be used in some cases to report the security issue to the
hosting organization.  Such organization reporting won't make sense for
malware, but could indeed be a very useful way to report security
vulnerabilities in externally hosted wheels.

> 

Reviewer: I think it would be useful to add a section listing requirements for external hosts in technical respects:

- MUST be served over HTTPS signed by a certificate trusted by Mozilla's root certificate store (which is what pip uses to verify certificates)
- MUST support HTTP range requests. This is used by some installers as a fallback if they cannot read the `.metadata` files PyPi serves, and I don't think this should degrade.
- Maybe should require HTTP/2 for multiplexing connections? Unsure if that is needed or useful.
- SHOULD use a CDN (orgs will want to do this anyway, but this is a good idea to recommend, even if not required)
- MUST commit to a stable URL for all wheel packages
- CAN remove an external file ONLY if that file is deleted from PyPi first. MUST NOT do so if yanked. This allows for handling IP removals/legal issues.

Reviewer 2: I think it does make sense to be explicit about external host requirements.

> MUST be served over HTTPS signed by a certificate trusted by Mozilla's root certificate store (which is what pip uses to verify certificates)

It looks like pip and uv are somewhat different in the details.
* [pip](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/topics/https-certificates/) by default (as of 24.2 and Python 3.10) uses the system cert store in addition to the [certifi](https://pypi.org/project/certifi/) (i.e. Mozilla) store.
* [uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/configuration/authentication/#custom-ca-certificates) uses the (Mozilla) `webpki-roots` store by default, but *not* the system store unless you include the `--native-tls` flag, although it's not clear from the docs whether this adds the system root certs to Mozilla's or replaces them.

So I guess it looks like the Mozilla one is the common denominator and probably should be required, but I feel like I want to hedge a little bit.  Hmm.  Maybe "MUST be served over HTTPs which SHOULD be trusted by Mozilla's root certificate, but MUST at least be compatible with pip's and uv's default stores"

Reviewer 2: > MUST support HTTP range requests. This is used by some installers as a fallback if they cannot read the .metadata files PyPi serves, and I don't think this should degrade.

Do you have any references for that?  I checked the pip and uv documentation, and the [PEP 658](https://peps.python.org/pep-0658/) docs, but couldn't find any discussion of this.  Do you know what installers support this behavior?

Reviewer 2: > Maybe should require HTTP/2 for multiplexing connections? Unsure if that is needed or useful.

Similarly, do you know of any installers that use this?  I couldn't find any mention of this in the pip or uv documentation.

Reviewer 2: The last three bullet items in your list sound like good recommendations.

Reviewer: I am a little worried about being too loose in defining what certs need to be supported. I think this may need to be something that PyPi checks when setting up an external host. I think it would be best to say the certs should be trusted by Mozilla's cert bundle, but the PyPi admins may modify the list of acceptable certificates. This allows flexibility for future modifications but makes the initial acceptable set extremely clear (well, as clear as certificate verification can be).

Reviewer: Also it looks like uv *replaces* the Mozilla bundle with the system cert store when using `--native-tls`. If you are doing that however it is up to you to verify that you are compatible with the certificates for the software you download at the end of the day.

Reviewer 2: Re: uv; yep, confirmed with Charlie that it [replaces](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv/blob/3ce34035c84804fdfb8b78cf11b9ba1b168d0f35/crates/uv-client/src/base_client.rs#L248).

Reviewer 2: > I am a little worried about being too loose in defining what certs need to be supported. I think this may need to be something that PyPi checks when setting up an external host. 

I suspect that in practice, support for Mozilla will always be the case, given that you want to *already* be compatible with pip and uv, but I'll come up with something that addresses your concerns.  Thanks!

Reviewer: > Do you have any references for that? I checked the pip and uv documentation, and the [PEP 658](https://peps.python.org/pep-0658/) docs, but couldn't find any discussion of this. Do you know what installers support this behavior?

I know for sure at least pip does (ref https://github.com/pypa/pip/blob/102d8187a1f5a4cd5de7a549fd8a9af34e89a54f/src/pip/_internal/network/lazy_wheel.py#L26-L29), and I just checked that uv does as well: https://github.com/astral-sh/uv/blob/ed1684a0e4caee45482098666da124b5aa195b5c/crates/uv-client/src/registry_client.rs#L600-L609

It isn't currently a requirement for a simple index, but PyPi supports it and I don't think that should regress because of external hosting. As a practical matter, supporting HTTP range requests is very easy if you are doing anything reasonable to serve wheels, such as putting them on S3, putting them behind a load balancer like nginx, etc.

> Maybe should require HTTP/2 for multiplexing connections? Unsure if that is needed or useful.
>
>Similarly, do you know of any installers that use this? I couldn't find any mention of this in the pip or uv documentation.

HTTP/2 is also a feature PyPi supports, and I think it would be bad to regress. While I am not sure if pip or uv currently use it, being able to multiplex connections could help with parallel downloading of wheels, which I know pip is exploring.

I am not knowledgeable enough about pip and uv to confidently say whether or not this is required, but HTTP/2 does provide some nice benefits, and I think it should be considered to be required. I don't think it is as important as range requests.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the links.  Are you comfortable with making both of these **SHOULD** requirements?

Reviewer: I think range requests is a MUST, since it is such an important optimization for large wheels, but HTTP/2 is fine to be SHOULD. I was looking at a pip install log and it seems like it was making HTTP/1.1 requests against PyPi, so HTTP/2 may be feasible to just not include in the requirements.

Reviewer: I think the details of SHOULD/MUST can be figured out on discuss.python.org.

Reviewer 2: Okay, sounds good.  I'll make ranges MUST and HTTP/2 SHOULD.

I think the thing that makes me a little uncomfortable about this section (to be pushed soon) is that these are requirements on external wheel hosts that PyPI can't really enforce.  The wording I'm trying to come up with is something like: `The following constraints lead to reliable and compatible external wheel hosting services`.

Let's see how that goes over when this gets posted to DPO.

Rejected ideas
==============

Several ideas were considered and rejected.

- Requiring digital signatures on externally hosted wheel files, either in
  addition to or other than hashes. We deem this unnecessary since the
  checksum requirement should be enough to validate that the metadata on PyPI
  for a wheel exactly matches the downloaded wheel.  The added complexity of
  key management outweighs any additional benefit such digital signatures
  might convey.
- Hash verification on ``.rim`` file uploads. PyPI *could* verify that the
  hash in the uploaded ``.rim`` file matches the externally hosted wheel
  before it accepts the upload, but this requires downloading the external

>   wheel and performing the checksum. This would impose an ordering restriction

Reviewer: I definitely think that wheels must be uploaded to external hosts before a RIM may be posted. If people have unpinned dependencies and a new RIM is uploaded their CI will fail.

Reviewer: (I don't think this needs to be verified by PyPi however)

Reviewer: Actually, I think PyPi making an HTTP HEAD request against the wheel URL is cheap and should suffice to verify that the wheel is *probably* there.

The external host could even pass the hash of the wheel in the headers of the HEAD request to verify it matches with the RIM.

If you like this idea, We should add it to the list of requirements of external hosts.

Reviewer 2: > I definitely think that wheels must be uploaded to external hosts before a RIM may be posted. If people have unpinned dependencies and a new RIM is uploaded their CI will fail.

Agreed, although once [PEP 694](https://peps.python.org/pep-0694/) is implemented, uploading the `.rim` file to a stage before the external `.whl` is posted should be safe.

Reviewer 2: > The external host could even pass the hash of the wheel in the headers of the HEAD request to verify it matches with the RIM.

The complication here I think is that there's no standard way to return the hash in response to the `HTTP HEAD` request.  I'm mentioning this in the rejected ideas, with a footnote added about the checksum.

Reviewer: Yeah, I think just doing the HEAD request would be a significant benefit. Making sure something is there is better than nothing, and users will get a clear idea of what is wrong if the hashes mismatch at install time.

  compatibility with `pip <https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/topics/https-certificates/>`__
  and `uv
  <https://docs.astral.sh/uv/configuration/authentication/#custom-ca-certificates>`__.  At
  the time of this writing, ``pip`` 24.2 on Python 3.10 or newer uses the system
  certificate store in addition to the Mozilla store provided by the third party `certifi
  <https://pypi.org/project/certifi/>`__ Python package. ``uv`` uses the Mozilla store
  provided by the `webpki-roots <https://github.com/rustls/webpki-roots>`__ crate, but not
  the system store unless the ``--native-tls`` flag is given [#fn1]_.  *The PyPI
  administrators may modify this requirement in the future, but compatibility with popular
  installers will not be compromised.*
- External wheel hosts **SHOULD** use a content delivery network (`CDN
  <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Content_delivery_network>`__), just as PyPI does.
- External wheel hosts **MUST** commit to a stable URL for all wheels they host.
- Externally hosted wheels **MUST NOT** be removed from an external wheel host unless the
  corresponding ``.rim`` file is deleted from PyPI first, and **MUST NOT** remove external
  wheels for yanked releases.

> - Externally wheel hosts **SHOULD** respond to `HTTP HEAD`_ requests on the ``.whl`` URL

Reviewer: This is already required by the HTTP spec, as long as the path exists :)
https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#section-9.1-9

Reviewer 2: Of course! 😄
